Unlike your intended use statement,
which is directly tied to your algorithm's risk category in the eyes of
the FDA and states exactly what you would use your algorithm for,
the indications for use describe
precise situations and reasons where and why you would use this device.
If we go back to our scalpel example,
where we stated an extremely general intended use that got us to class 1,
we could use the indications for use statement of our FDA submission to
encourage physicians to use it for other things like eye surgery,
which is what we had initially wanted to label it as.
We could say something like indicated for use as
a cutting device during surgical pathology and minor medical procedures.
If we revisit our mammography algorithm example again,
where our intended use was to assist the radiologist,
some indications for use that we might want to say are;
indicated for use in screening mammography studies.
We might also want to add in what age range or algorithm is indicated for.
Let's say we trained our algorithm on a set of
mammograms for women between the ages of 20 and 60.
Human anatomy does change over time,
so we don't actually know how well it will perform on,
say, an 80-year-old, and would want to state its intended use for the 20-60 age range.
It may seem obvious,
but we would definitely want to state that this was
intended for mammography in the female population.
Finally, is there a component of the patient's history we think is important?
Depending on the data we trained on,
we may want to exclude women who have had breast cancer in the past.
In that case, we would state with no prior history of breast cancer.
If it were to be run on someone who fell in this category,
it wouldn't be the end of the world,
but we're stating explicitly to the end-user,
here the radiologist, that it's not really intended to be reliable in this population.
Seem confusing?
It totally is.
When working in the industry, though,
depending on the size of your company,
you as the algorithm developer may have to be very involved in this process.
I myself once worked at
a five-person medical imaging AI startup where I was deeply involved in this process.
I then transitioned to
a very large technology company with a division in medical imaging,
where I had a whole team of
regulatory people helping with the algorithm I was working on.
Regardless, the FDA will act as your partner and help you through this process.
In addition, there are tons of resources out there to help you better understand this.
This lesson is intended to introduce you to the complexities of the regulatory system,
so they can be in the back of your mind as you think
about how your algorithm might be used clinically.